# Problem Statement

    A circle is randomly generated by sampling two points uniformly and independently
    from the interior of a square and using these points to determine its diameter.
    What is the probability that the circle has a part of it that is off the square?
    Give your answer in exact terms.

# 1. Monte Carlo Simultion

    My first idea for tackling this problem is to write a Monte Carlo simulation.
    The rational for this is that it will provide a decimal approximation that will give
    me a ball park for what my answer should be. The problem requires the answer to be
    submitted in exact terms, so a decimal approximation will not suffice. Let's look
    at the output of this simulation to help give us a better idea of the problem at hand.

    For my simulation I created a square of size 10,000 x 10,000 and picked points at
    random. I did this 10 million times, and ended up with an approximation that was
    0.5233326. Note that this is the probability that the circle is inside the square.
    The probability that it is outside is the converse of this, which is 1 - 0.5233326,
    roughly equating to 0.4764543. I had a friend make their own simulation to ensure
    that there were no mistakes with mine, and he got a similar number. Thus, we are in the
    correct ballpark for simulating.

    This is not enough to be submitted for an answer. We want this in exact terms. Upon
    discussion of this with my brother, he initially assumed it might be close to pi / 4
    after doing some brainstorming. However, this was much smaller than that, indicating
    our initial idea was wrong. I noticed that it was closer to 50 percent than 75 percent,
    indicating that it might be closer to pi / 6 than pi / 4. It is possible to just guess
    the answer that it is outside the square is 1 - pi/6 and submit that. However, this
    doesn't offer any real insight, and leaves me with a feeling of false pride. Not to
    mention, it's not even guaranteed to be correct, it's just a guess based on an approximation.

# 2. Simplifying the Problem

    The problem at hand is currently difficult for me to wrap my head around. When working
    on this problem, I recalled this video from 3Blue1Brown's YouTube channel. Here is a link
    to said video.

        The hardest problem on the hardest test - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OkmNXy7er84

    One of the core ideas surrounding this video revolves around problem solving techniques.
    The video at hand displays a very difficult problem, and shows the solution to it as well.
    However, the more important thing that one should take from videos and problems like this
    are the tools and skills that they can then translate to other problems in their life.

    With that being said, how can we simplify our current problem into something that is easier
    for us to wrap our heads around, while maintaining the integrity of the current problem at hand?
    Let's take the problem and come up with a much simpler version. Let's start by working on
    a 1 dimensional version of the problem instead.

# 3. Simplified Problem Statement

    Instead of working on areas of two dimesions, let's instead work on something tht is only
    in one dimension. I will state this updated problem now.

    Problem Statement: Given a line of length L, what is the probability that two randomly
    chosen points on the line will have length less than k, where k < L.

    Instead of having to work with points in an enclosed area, we instead get to work with
    two points on a numberline. This allows for us to work with the problem in a single dimension
    to get a better foothold of the problem.

    The first thing to note is that we are taking two points, x and y, and checking to see if
    the absolute value of their difference is less than our given value of k.

        - |x - y| < k

    the tricky part with this is that we are working with two variables and only have one equation.
    Because of this, it becomes difficult visually to make any progress on this problem. However,
    we can instead try to think about this as an XY graph on a two dimensional plane, and pick the
    points that make sense for our given value k. 

    Let's first assign variable k a value. We will assume that our line is of length L = 10. We will
    pick the given k value to be half this length, at k = 5. We now want to know what the probability
    is that given two random points, the length between them is less than 5.

    If we graph |x - y| < k, {0 <= x <= 10}, {0 <= y <= 10}, {k = 5}, we realize that we end up with
    a square area and two isosceles triangles in the top left and bottom right corners respectively.
    This is a clue that can help aid us in our journey.

    Let us first make sense of this by drawing a diagonal through this square from the bottom left
    to the top right. This is the line y = x. At each point on this line, x and y are equal to each
    other. therefore, their distance between each other is zero, which is less than 5. The difference
    between x and y must be less than 5. We can then update our graph to have a constant value c for
    the y intercept. We can re-write this as y = x + c. However, c must be at most 5 in terms of
    the absolute difference for y. We can then generate two different equations for this.

        - y = x + 5
        - y = x - 5

    Thes two lines when graphed inside our 10 x 10 square show the lines that seperate the regions of
    our problem. The triangles in the corners illustrate (x, y) points where their difference is
    greater than the value k, and the inner hexegon illustrates points where their value is less than k.
    If we take a moment to think about this graph, parts of it should make sense. One question I had,
    was why was this a linear relation? Well, for starters, the equations we have all worked with
    involve terms with powers of 1. However, this did not give me a deep intuitive understanding
    of why this equation worked the way it did. However, what made it click for me was thinking about
    the problem as a financial product. I have two terms x and y which must equal a given amount.
    If I increase x by a certain amount, I must then decrease y by that exact amount. This is
    very similar to the idea of a slope, where you have a rise and a run. More over, the slope
    must always be equal to 1 because of this.

    In turn, we can transform this into a geometry problem, and recognize now that the probability of
    our two points x and y having their difference be greater than or less than a given value k is just
    the ratio between these areas. Specifically, the less than k probability is the ratio between our
    hexagon and the overall square, and the greater than probability is the ratio between the triangles
    and the square.

    The triangles will be isosceles, and have side lengths of (L - k). This can be illustrated by a quick
    example. Let's say we want to check all points where the difference between x and y is greater than 7.
    If we move up along the y axis, keeping x at zero, then the points where their difference is greater than
    7 is all the points greater than 7, specifically 7 < y <= 10 which has a length of 3, or 10 - 7.

    Our right angled isoceles triangles can be combined to create a square of dimension (L - k) x (L - k). 
    
    Our overall square has size L x L, and thus their difference will be the following.
    
        - Probability the difference between x and y is greater than k in an L sized line.
            ---> (L - k)² / L²

        - probability the difference between x and y is less than k in an L sized line.
            ---> 1 - ((L - k)² / L²)

    We can simplify this even further, by requiring the length of our line to be 1, giving us a 1x1 square.
    This is a way of reducing the problem and giving us a 'unit circle' equivilant. By doing this,
    we end up with the following equations.

        - Probability the difference between x and y is greater than k.
            ---> (1 - k)²

        - probability the difference between x and y is less than k.
            ---> 1 - (1 - k)²

    I looked around online to see if any variations of this one dimensional problem existed,
    and it turns out that many posts have been made. Here is one of them now.

            - https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/3496524/probability-that-the-distance-between-two-random-points-on-a-line-segment-l-is


# 4. Moving up the Difficulty Ladder

    We have now gotten a more intuitive understanding of the one dimensional version of this problem.
    Instead of having to think about this in terms of x and y points on a line, we were able to take
    this problem and transform it into something only involving the specified distance k that we were
    looking for. We took a 1 dimensional problem, and upscaled it into a 2 dimensional geometry problem
    involving ratios, and then derived an elegant formula. Ideally, we would like to do a similar thing
    with our current problem.

    Instead of having just two values X, and Y, we instead are dealing with two points, (x1, y1) and
    (x2, y2). When we make a circle from these two points, we want the circle to be drawn inside our
    region. How can we convert our previous idea of distance between two points, to valid regions
    inside our square and the resulting area?

    Is there a way to look at a point and determine the area of the region of valid points that can be hit?
    If you can, can you then create a double integral for both x and y and integrate over this area? 


    point is (x, y)

    square is 1x1

    maybe look at the circle and think about the points if the are on the same horizontal axis,
    then the same vertical axis, and then diagonal? Maybe work out the first two to help you
    figure out the third case.














    
